# Genetic algorithm


> In genetic algorithms and evolutionary computation, crossover, also called recombination, is a genetic operator used to combine the genetic information of two parents to generate new offspring. It is one way to stochastically generate new solutions from an existing population, and is analogous to the crossover that happens during sexual reproduction in biology. Solutions can also be generated by cloning an existing solution, which is analogous to asexual reproduction. Newly generated solutions are typically mutated before being added to the population.

- Is an optimization strategy that mimics natural selection
- Solves Knapsackck problem 
- Generate genome one solution (list of 1s and 0s)
- Mutation step is a simple swap
 

##### POPULATION SIZE EFFECT
> If the algorithm continuously get stuck on poor solution it indicates;
- We have low genetic diversity because our population of solutions is so low.
- Overtime they really start to look more and more like each other
and they are kind of unable to break out that optimal solution.
- Solution: We can mitigate that by increasing our population size 


##### Uniform crossover
- In uniform crossover, typically, each bit is chosen from either parent with equal probability. Other mixing ratios are sometimes used, resulting in offspring which inherit more genetic information from one parent than the other. In a uniform crossover, we don’t divide the chromosome into segments, rather we treat each gene separately. In this, we essentially flip a coin for each chromosome to decide whether or not it’ll be included in the off-spring. We can also bias the coin to one parent, to have more genetic material in the child from that parent.


### Experiment questions?

> **a. Do any of 1-pt, 2-pt or uniform crossover seem to perform better than the alternatives?**
- It is observed that 2-pt crossover performed better than other. Generate new solutions from an existing population helped new generations to perform better.
> **b. How much does mutation seem to matter, and how sensitive are things to the mutation rate?**
- I assigned 1/2 to the mutation rate. 
- Observed better result of maximum distance traveled by the new generations.
- Increasing the mutation will prevent algorithm to get stuck even tho we don't converge on a great solution very quickly.
- Mutation really helps us to explore more of the solution space and try to continue finding a good solution. 
- Newly generated solutions are typically mutated before being added to the population.
- Too high mutation rate increases the probability of searching more areas in search space, however, prevents population to converge to any optimum solution.
- A more dynamic mutation rate, as Paulo Gaspar proposed, is more preferred.
> **c. Elite selection is included and has a default value of 3. If you alter this value do things tend to improve, get worse etc.?**
- It improves. I increase the elite selection from 3 to 10 and new generations performed better. You may see the outputs below or detailed outputs in demo.txt files.


### Outputs
Experiement Note: Demo **mate2ptCrossover** method with **n=3** \
Output file:  demo1.txt \
Max distance travelled:  169.3373565673828 \
Min distance travelled:  -2.2915486097335815

Experiement Note: Demo **mate2ptCrossover** method with **n=10** \
Output file:  demo2.txt \
Max distance travelled:  188.0631561279297 \
Min distance travelled:  -2.387052536010742

Experiement Note: Demo **mate1ptCrossover** method with **n=3** \
Output file:  demo3.txt \
Max distance travelled:  151.1476287841797 \
Min distance travelled:  -1.441699892282486

Experiement Note: Demo **mate1ptCrossover** method with **n=10** \
Output file:  demo4.txt \
Max distance travelled:  152.742431640625 \
Min distance travelled:  -1.2892568707466125

Experiement Note: Demo **mateUniformCrossover** method with **n=3** 
Output file:  demo5.txt
Max distance travelled:  158.30218505859375
Min distance travelled:  -1.1699118763

Experiement Note: Demo **mateUniformCrossover** method with **n=10** 
Output file:  demo6.txt
Max distance travelled:  173.29141235351562 (first demo weirdly resulted 104)
Min distance travelled:  -1.0086699752137065

 Experiement Note: Demo **mutate** method with **n=3** 
Output file:  demo7.txt
Max distance travelled:  186.50595092773438
Min distance travelled:  -1.9084889888763428

 Experiement Note: Demo **mutate** method with **n=10** 
Output file:  demo8.txt
Max distance travelled:  143.51046752929688
Min distance travelled:  -1.0452319085597992


##### Resource
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Crossover_(genetic_algorithm)
https://www.researchgate.net/post/Why-is-the-mutation-rate-in-genetic-algorithms-very-small
